I wanna create a table of contents.
So I wanna be able to see
what else is in the docs.
And to do that as kind
of a shortcut today,
we will just create a component
that does that for us.
So the way that that works is we're
going to get into our components,
and let's just create something
called table-of-contents.js.
And inside of that I'm going to,
we'll just start out with some style so
that we don't have to do that in phases.
So we'll set the fragment of jsx.
we'll import jsx from the UI.
And then we're also
going to import graphql.
Link so
that we can link between the pages, and
then a hook that Gatsby gives
us called useStaticQquery.
Now because this is not a template,
we don't have access
to the page queries or context or
variables or anything.
So we're gonna use this useStaticQuery.
So that we can get data out but
it's important to note that we can only
do this if you don't need variables.
You can't,
you have to hard code everything and
useStaticQuery that's why it's static
you don't get dynamic content.
So first let's set up our
component itself, TableofContents.
If I can spell it,
that doesn't get any arguments.
And we will export that as our default.
Inside, we will,
as a first step, load our data.
So let's get the data and that's gonna
be the result of useStaticQuery.
And we use the graphqL tag to
signify that it is indeed a query.
And I want to get all Doc's page nodes.
And I want the ids so
that we can use it as a react key.
I want the title so
that we can have some display text.
And I want the path so that we know where
to send somebody if they click the link.
Once we've got that data, it's going to
come in and be stored in this data prop.
Gatsby will do this at
build time actually.
So we don't need to await it or anything.
It just, as far as the component is
concerned when it runs in the browser,
that data will already exist.
Then we can for convenience,
let's rename pages and
we'll get data.allDocs.page.nodes,
then we can return a thing.
So the thing that we want to return Is,
we'll
give it a div in case we wanna style it or
add some borders or something around it.
We're not gonna do that for now,
but we wanna leave that door open.
Let's add a heading to it.
So we'll say Explore the Docs.
And then we'll just show these in a list.
So let's map over our pages.
And for each one, we're gonna
get out that id, path and title.
And we can return,
an Li will set the key to the id.
And then inside of that, we're gonna use a
link, and I want that to link to the path.
And I wanna give it some styles.
So the styles that I want are actually
gonna be when it's active.
So what that means is when we're
reviewing the current page,
I wanna show a slightly different style so
we know what page were on.
So we'll do that in just a second.
And then we wanna that
to link to the title.
So this is what will be displayed.
And then whenever this is the active class
Gatsby has this really handy helper that
will let us just set whenever the current
link is the one that's being visited.
It'll just set a class name for us.
So I'm gonna set that to active.
So now we're getting into some theme
UI stuff that's a little different.
We're wanting conditional styles.
We want this component to only
have a style when we're using
a class on it when it
has that active class.
So to do that, we can use a pretty
standard CSS and JS technique.
Which is to use the ampersand which
references the current element.
And then we modify it with the active
class by adding this .active here.
Inside of that we can apply
whatever styles we want.
So let's say we want our
font style to be italic.
We'll say that we want the textDecoration
to be none because it's the current
link we wanna deemphasize,it is a link but
not actually deactivated as a link.
And then I wanna go one step further and
I actually wanna tell people that this
is the page that they're viewing.
So I'm gonna use the after
pseudo class and
again we just added as a string,and
then add a sub Object here.
And I'm gonna set the content.
And this is worth noting the content in
CSS and JS ends up looking like
it's double quoted because
you have to code it once to make
it a property for JavaScript.
And then you have to quote it for CSS,
which means that we've got
single quotes for JavaScript.
And then we've got double quotes for CSS.
So I'm gonna set this as
the currently viewing.
And so these ones are for JavaScript.
These ones are for CSS.
That's a gotcha.
That definitely got me so
it's worth just kind of trying to
pin that in your head for, when you
are trying to use this in the future.
So now that we've got this,
we should be able to just use it.
So let's go into our doc's page and
I'm just going to toss it in.
Let's see how it goes.
So let's import TableofContents
from table-of-contents and
we can drop that right at the bottom.
Go to start the site first,
yarn workspace theme-dev develop.
Reload and there we go,
we're currently viewing.
So, let's add an extra page to make sure
that it's working the way we expect.
So, we'll go into theme-dev under doc's
and I'm gonna create a new file, and
we'll call it another.mdx.
So, we'll give it a title,
let's call it Another Page.
And we'll say More docs.
And there we go.
So now we can click
around to our pages and
see that we've got other pages in there
they are showing up the way we expect.
The theme is hot reloading,
you know we created that file.
We didn't have to stop and restart it.
Just pick the right up.
And our Table of Contents is
doing what we want it to do.
So there is a good place to save our work.
So let's get at all,
take a look at what we've done.
Okay, so we updated the docs page to
use our table of contents wrote that
table of contents component and
created a new Doc's page.
So we'll commit that.
Say, add table of contents.
Push that up.
>> So, where are you exporting
the page queries do you need that
export the static queries as well?
>> No.
So the page queries are a special case,
where we are signifying to Gatsby
that during the build process
specifically during on create pages,
this template is gonna be used.
And this query should be
treated as a page query.
That gives it access to the context which
is the, like the variables and stuff.
In a static query, a static query is
just any use of useStaticQuery inside
of a component will be picked up.
But again, the limitation here is that we
can't use variables there's no access to
outside context.
We can't even interpolate data,
I couldn't take a prop and
then put that prop in here.
So a static query needs to
be hardcoded at build time.
And the reason for that is that the way
that Gatsby's handling the graphQL layer
under the hood, that graphQL layer doesn't
continue to work once the site is built.
It's only there during the build.
And that means that all of these queries
are actually getting compiled away.
And that's being done using abstract
syntax tree transformations.
It's kind of how Babel works under,
the hood it takes the code and
it breaks it into its component pieces and
tokens and then it kind of understands
those as a programming language.
And then the AST gets modified so
Gatsby will take the the component.
Look for these useStaticQuery instances,
break that down into an AST replace
it with the results of the query and
then rewrite that component
with the data in place.
So that's why there are restrictions
on it because when you get into
AST transformations,
trying to chase down a variable to where
it's declared is really challenging.
That is something that the team is
working on but it is not in place, yet.
>> He wants to know if we can export only
one page query from one page file or
you can export multiple queries.
You can only export one
query per page file.
But that actually isn't a problem
because you can just add,
like as many queries as you
want next to each other.
And it would just be
data.Doc.Page.data.doc.allfile.
So, you can only do one query but
that query can have as many
subqueries in it as you want.